PAGES: 4

--- PAGE 1 ---
Cat Cat Revolution: An Interspecies Gaming Experience 
Frank Noz 
Carnegie Mellon University 
University of Madeira 
frank.noz@gmail.com 
Jinsoo An 
contact@jinsooan.com 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Despite owners’ desires to in clude pets in their everyday 
activities, pets have yet to be included in the digital gaming 
experience. The Cat Cat Revolution (CCR) is a digital game 
of cat and mouse that allows cats to participate in play 
through a species-appropriate interface. The game applies 
Human-Computer Interaction (H CI) principles to pets and 
casts pets as participants in the gaming experience. During 
the pilot study, pet owners char acterized CCR as a mutually 
positive experience, describing the game as a “fun” way to 
play. CCR explores the effects of including pets in the 
digital gaming experience.  
Author Keywords 
Non-human interfaces, interspeci es gaming, digital play  
ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m. Information interfaces a nd presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
General Terms 
Experimentation, Design, Theory. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the U.S., felines are the largest group of pet companions 
with a population of 93.6 million [1]. Americans share their 
homes and lives with pets. Surveys, measuring attitudes and 
behavior towards pets, docum ent how pet owners endow 
pets with human characteristics and needs. Owners consider 
pets as friends [3], extensions of self [2], and family [3]. 
Surveys also report the love, company, companionship, and 
affection enjoyed by owners [1]. Owners’ attitudes and 
behaviors illustrate the significance of pets and their role in 
social interaction.  
 “Whether animals have selves or not, what is more relevant to 
sociologists—and more verifiable—is that humans often act 
toward animals as if they have selves, and in ways that overlap 
with how they act toward humans” [11, p. 380].  
RELATED WORK 
Recent work acknowledges our de sire to include pets in 
everyday activities. In the 1990’s, virtual pets seduced 
consumers into nurturing their f eelings and needs [14, 19]. 
The Tamagotchi digitized emotional engagement and 
illustrated human’s capacity to attribute anthropomorphic 
characteristics to virtual pets. Other products such as the 
AIBO digitized the pet experience by introducing robotic 
pets into the home. Friedman , Kahn, and Hagman analyzed 
AIBO discussion boards and described how the robotic pets 
challenged traditional emotional boundaries, extended 
concepts of self, and replaced interaction with live pets [7].  
Poultry.Internet also illustrates how pets can be included in 
HCI discourse [18]. The designers of the application 
digitized human-pet touch and explored various interaction 
methods by mediating remote petting. The system provided 
bi-directional communication using haptic and visual cues. 
Users touched pets via a tangibl e interface that mirrored the 
pet’s position and orientation. The interface relayed touch 
through a specially designed vest, worn by the chicken. The 
vest simulated human touch and communicated the pet’s 
movement back to the user, in  turn enabling real-time touch 
interaction.  
Despite these examples, digital interaction with pets 
remains understudied in HCI, so we turned to the fields of 
robotics and AI to better understand how to include pets in 
digital interaction. Suchman's theory of situated cognition 
caused us to rethink the constitutive nature of intelligence 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for  
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,  
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior  
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2011, May 7–12, 2011, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright 2011 ACM  978-1-4503-0267-8/11/05....$10.00. 
 
Figure 1. User #1 watches his kitten track the mouse. 
CHI 2011 • Session: Cats, Dogs, Sports, Games & Books
May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada
2661

--- PAGE 2 ---
(human and cat) and machine [16]. Her theories highlighted 
the need to accommodate emergent play interactions and 
reframed the way we designed for intelligence. In addition, 
Brooks' "New AI" inspired us to build a relatively simple 
system, using minimal representations, centered on 
emergent intelligence [5]. 
Recent research provided actionable ways to translate 
lessons from the fields of robotics and AI into CCR’s 
design. Leahu, Sengers, and Mateas highlighted a number 
of "New AI" strategies to create ubiquitous systems that 
"appeared to be intelligent" [12]. They use these strategies 
to address problems of "AI completeness," suggesting the 
development of systems that take advantage of highly-
situated contexts. Influenced by Leahu’s work, Taylor 
reflected on examples of "New AI" and suggested their 
potential application within HC I [17]. Taylor proposed HCI 
broaden its concepts of intelligence to expand the 
interactional possibilities between humans and machine. 
Taylor used the intersection of "New AI" and HCI to 
reposition the role of design in intelligent systems and 
create systems "where intelligence itself becomes the 
design focus" [17].
  
Sociological Study of Human-Pet Play 
In the past 20 years, sociologists have begun to study 
human-pet play interactions. Alger’s work suggests that 
owners actively assume the ro le of animals, and infer 
thoughts and feelings from the animal’s perspective [2]. 
Sanders suggests that projecting human capabilities onto 
pets makes them legitimate partic ipants in social interaction 
[15]. In addition, sociologist s offer insights on how owners 
and pets use nonverbal communication to negotiate social 
order and interspecies interaction. Researchers suggests that 
humans and pets rely on their past play experiences, or a 
shared history of symbolic behavior, to non-verbally 
communicate [2, 4].  
Ethnographic studies of human -animal play reflect on the 
intersubjectivity between particip ants [9, 11]. For example, 
Goode proposes that pets have an asymmetrical availability 
to interpret interaction [9]. Findings from Jerolmack’s work 
suggest that human-pet play does not require shared 
meanings and/or intentions to coordinate interaction [11]. 
Other scholars [4, 11] do not view shared language as a 
prerequisite for intersubjectivity, instead, they view human-
pet intersubjectivity along a continuum, ranging from 
shared understanding to a simple shared awareness of an 
object. The sociological study of  human-pet play offers 
insights into the social interactions that allow owners and 
pets to negotiate and co-construct play experiences. 
DESIGNING FOR INTERSPECIES INTERACTION 
We conducted interviews with owners, reviewed online cat 
forums, and pet owner surveys [1 , 3] to inform and inspire 
CCR’s design. Our findings suggested chase as a common 
play theme and species appropriate activity. Next, we 
designed the interface to accommodate audio, visual, and 
touch interactions from human  and cat participants. For 
example, we designed a deictic  [12] mouse representation 
to communicate digital interactions in a species-
appropriate, understandable, and actionable manner. We 
designed the mouse to entice cats to chase while catering to 
the human-centric model of th e mouse as an input device. 
The interface appropriates a popular chase object, the 
mouse, and anchors the cat’s interaction to natural chase 
behaviors, allowing felines to chase and paw during the 
game.  
In addition, we designed the interface to support cat's color 
acuity. Cats are generally colorblind when it comes to red, 
but have excellent ability to distinguish blue and green. 
[13]. Early prototypes tested combinations of mouse color, 
size, brightness, and movement to bolster target 
discrimination and tracking on the display. The mouse 
squeaks when hit to provide audio feedback to participants. 
Audio testing ensured feedback did not frighten or 
discourage play.  
System Description 
Our system is comprised of two components, an iPad and 
an iPhone. The iPad application mediates cat-computer 
interaction through a combination of graphics, sound, and 
touch. The iPad interface uses a digital mouse 
representation entice cats by changing its orientation, 
velocity, and direction. The game has single and multi-
player modes. In single-player mode, cats interact with the 
iPad by chasing the mouse as  it randomly moves across the 
display. During multiplayer mode, owners wirelessly 
connect to the iPad using an iPhone. When connected, the 
iPhone mirrors the iPad’s interface and allows owners to 
control the mouse’s orientation, velocity, and direction. 
CCR uses iPads, iPhones, and game modes to support 
interspecies play. 
RESEARCH APPROACH 
Seven owners (five female and two males) and their cats 
participated in our pilot study. We recruited participants 
through our extended social network and none of the 
participants were involved in  the study or development of 
CCR. The studies took place in participants’ homes and 
lasted 60 to 90 minutes. During these sessions, we asked 
participants to perform four separate gaming tasks after 
familiarizing themselves with the game. Owners drove the 
play tasks and answered open-ended questions about their 
gaming experience and interactions with their pets.  
We analyzed the data using grounded theory [8], borrowing 
themes from sociological studi es of human-pet play [11] 
and surveys [1, 3]. We analyzed the audio, video, and 
subsequent transcriptions from the owner's responses, 
discussions, and think-alouds. The analysis used audio and 
transcripts from the sessions to interpret and encode the 
owners' interactions. The info rmal pilot study explored both 
owner and cat interaction during CCR.  
Evalutating CCR 
CCR is a game that allows pet owners to interact and 
potentially strengthen their relationship with their pets by 
CHI 2011 • Session: Cats, Dogs, Sports, Games & Books
May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada
2662

--- PAGE 3 ---
playing a digital game. We feel that the novel experiences 
and interactions explored during our pilot tests may 
contribute knowledge to areas such as Human-Robot 
Interaction (HRI), design, a nd HCI. The following findings 
explore a number of play interactions to evaluate CCR's 
effect on human-pet play. 
FINDINGS 
General Findings 
Our participants indicated that play was an important 
interaction with their cats and characterized CCR as a 
“fun” and mutually “beneficial” play experience. In 
addition, pet owners attributed a number of benefits to pet 
ownership including: mental well-being and therapeutic 
effects, freedom to be playful, feeling content, and felt 
play was good for the cat. Owners described a wide range 
of play interactions and gave detailed examples of 
“knowing” when their cat(s) wanted to play.  
The big guy is a tremendous rubber band fetcher. [W]hen we 
come out in the morning having coffee, he will go and find 
one and bring it to you, meaning he wants to play. {#7} 
Participants also described their pet’s dependence and 
reflected on their asymmetric relationship. For example: 
It’s just nice to have something else to take care of, like 
something that needs you to take care of it, and feed it, help 
him, and play with him. {#1} 
Despite owners’ acknowledgments of interspecies 
boundaries, they all included cats as family members. 
Finally, another consistent theme in the data was that 
owners embraced digital gaming and the idea of engaging 
in digital play forms with their cats. 
Pets as Viable Participants in Digital Gaming 
Our findings suggest that some owners see pets as viable 
participants in social interaction. CCR appeared to create 
new opportunities for owners to socially construct and 
deconstruct interspecies boundaries with their pet. By 
endowing pets with human capacities, we suggest that 
owners may cast their pets as viable participants in the 
digital gaming experience. Moreover, the inclusion of 
pets in digital interaction satisfies owner’s desire to 
include pets in everyday activities and may contribute to 
their physical health and ment al well-being. For example: 
My God, she does actually learn how to play it… I have never 
seen her interact with the cat like this. I have never seen her 
and this cat this friendly. They love each other now. This is 
great! {#4} 
It actually has really has helped [sic] us bond with her. Cause 
even if she’s not really interested in it, just us trying to get her 
interested in it is really a bonding experience. {#4} 
I like teaching her how to use technology, it’s kind of cool. I 
feel like I am educating her. {#3} 
I feel like there is more of a reward system there for us than 
there is for her, because Wow! It looks like she is using the 
computer. {#4} 
In the first quote, the owner e xpresses surprise when her cat 
begins to hit the mouse target during a game of CCR. The 
owner(s) describe the rewards of  play interactions, which in 
turn strengthened and reinforced ownership bonds. These 
examples advance the viability, practical utility, and 
benefits of including pets in the gaming experience. In 
digital gaming, it is not important whether the pet has 
human capabilities; rather, what is important is whether 
owners act as if their pets have  the capacity to do so [6, 11].  
Evaluating the Design of CCR 
CCR's design uses a number of strategies to engage 
participants in digital play. We used sociological studies of 
human-pet play to identify and design for existing emergent 
interactions that naturally o ccur during human-pet play. In 
addition, "New AI" strategies refocused the design to 
exploit the worldly contexts of play. The following 
examples highlight several im portant design considerations 
and their potential affect on play interactions, situated 
context, and emergence. 
We designed CCR around existing human-pet play 
interactions to support play experiences. CCR 
accommodates asymmetrical re lationships by coordinating 
interaction around a simple and species appropriate gaming 
experience. The analysis indica ted the presence of existing 
play interactions in all ow ners including: role-play, 
projection of social identity, and use of symbolic behavior. 
In the excerpt below, the participants temporarily take-on 
the cat’s role to describe the cat’s multi-player preferences. 
This finding illustrates how some owners use role-play and 
projection of social identity during digital interaction. 
She likes it better when we control it. Uh huh. {#3} 
[S]eems like he likes it best when its not like directly under 
the holes, cause if I put it right here he doesn’t . . . might be 
the reflection of the light off the top of the box cause he can 
see it easier. Maybe that makes it look more three-
dimensional. {#1} 
CCR's design was inspired by three "New AI" challenges 
including: placing participants  "in the loop," allowing 
participants to interpret and interact with the system, and 
participating in the context of play. For example, the deictic 
mouse representation communi cates state in actionable 
ways and elicited specific behavioral interactions from both 
participants. During each of the play-tasks, owners 
experimented with single and multi-player modes and 
reflected on their gaming experience. 
I like the single player one…. I think its more fun when I am 
interacting with him and the th ing [CCR] at the same time…. 
One thing I do like about it though, I can play with him or be 
away and he can still play with it too. That feather thing 
[feather-on-a-stick] that I have, I have to manipulate that and 
if I am not there he is disinterested in it. {#1} 
Multi-player. She reacts to it better. Rather than it going 
randomly, sometimes she likes it better if it stays in one place 
for a while and then moves really fast. There are certain 
movement patterns that she reacts too. {#3} 
CHI 2011 • Session: Cats, Dogs, Sports, Games & Books
May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada
2663

--- PAGE 4 ---
What is important for me in this experience is seeing her react 
to it and then engaging her. I was playing along with her. {#2} 
The first example above demonstrates how the owner used 
single-player mode to interact with the iPad and the cat at 
the same time, a scenario we had not considered during the 
design of CCR. In the second quote, the owner elicits play 
behaviors by gauging the cat’s interest. Using the iPhone, 
she experimented with mouse movements until finding a 
pattern that resulted in chase behaviors. In the third 
example above, we suggest the minimalist design 
accommodates unplanned play interactions by relying on 
the participants’ ability to actively reconstitute play 
dynamics. 
They just have to learn to play. You just play with them. Trial 
and error a lot . . . but, part of it comes from the playing and 
observing. He just will learn. {#1} 
It makes you feel connected and it’s like a conversation. They 
do not use words, so you use play. I think they contribute to 
our lives, so I think it is important to interact with them at 
their level. So, playing with them and seeing their natural play 
behaviors cause their play behaviors are attack and catch 
things. {#6} 
In the first quote above, the participant describes the 
process of learning a new game as a constitutive process of 
trial and error, requiring both participants to actively 
interpret behavior to negotiate game play. In the second 
quote, the participant metaphorically describes play as a 
conversation. She redresses her pet’s asymmetrical ability 
to share and interpret meaning by interacting with her pet at 
its level. She co-constructs play experiences by interpreting 
natural feline behaviors in the context of play. In addition, 
the second quote suggests an emotional component to 
digital pet play, which causes the participant to reflect on 
the emotional experience of CCR. These cases suggest that 
participants rely on context and extra-system knowledge to 
create meaningful play interactions. 
CONCLUSION 
Our findings suggest implica tions for future human-pet 
gaming systems. The exam ples above explore how 
participants actively negotiate d play interactions, despite 
their asymmetrical ability to share or coordinate interaction, 
and reflect the constitutive nature of human-pet play. The 
game allows participants to co-construct play experiences 
by exploiting the contextual a nd social dynamics of human-
pet play. In addition, the game uses deictic representations 
to communicate state in acti onable ways and encourage 
specific behavioral interactions from both participants. 
These design considerations resulted in a novel opportunity 
to explore new ways to include pets in the digital gaming 
experience.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are indebted to many friends who read and commented 
on the paper. We would like to thank the reviewers, Susan 
Wyche, Jofish Kaye, Daniel Ashbrook, Vas Kostakos, and 
Ian Oakley for their suggestions and feedback. We would 
like to thank Gavin Bowman and Daniel Yang for their help 
with testing and development. Thank-you Centro de 
Ciência e Tecnologia da Madeira. 
REFERENCES 
1. "2009-2010 National Pet Owners Survey." Survey. 
American Pet Products Association , 2010. 
2. Alger, J. M. and S. F. Alger. Cat Culture: The Social 
World of a Cat Shelter.  Temple University Press, 2003. 
3. AP-Petside.com. "Pets and their owners." Conducted 
by GfK Roper Public Affairs & Media, 2009. 
4. Arluke, A. and C. Sanders. Regarding Animals. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1996. 
5. Brooks, R. A. Intelligence without representation. 
Artificial Intelligence.  42, (1991b). 
6. Cerulo, K. A. "Nonhumans in  Social Interaction." 
Annu. Rev. Sociol. 35 (2009), 531-552. 
7. Friedman, B., Kahn, P.H., and Hagman, J. "Hardware 
Companions? – What Online AIBO Discussion Forums 
Reveal about the Human-Robotic Relationship." In 
Proc. CHI '03, ACM Press (2003), 273-280. 
8. Glaser, B.G. and Strauss, A. The Discovery of 
Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research.  
Aldine Transaction, 1967. 
9. Goode, David. Playing with My Dog, Kate: An 
Ethnomethodological Study  of Canine-human 
Interaction. Purdue University Press, 2007. 
10. Irvine, Leslie. If You Tame Me: Understanding Our 
Connection with Animals.  2004. 
11. Jerolmack, Colin. Humans, Animals, and Play: 
Theorizing Interaction When Intersubjectivity is 
Problematic. Sociological Theory  27.4 (2009). 
12. Leahu, L., Sengers, P., & Mateas, M. "Interactionist AI 
and the promise of ubicomp, or, how to put your box in 
the world without putting the world in your box."  In 
Proc. Ubicomp '08, ACM Press (2008), 134-143. 
13. Loop, M.S., Millican, L.C., and Thomas, S.R. 
"Photopic spectral sensitivity of the cat." J. Physiol. 
382 (1987). 
14. Pettman, Dominic. "Love in the Time of Tamagotchi." 
Theory, Culture & Society. 26.2-3 (2009), 189-208. 
15. Sanders, C. "Understanding dogs: caretakers 
attributions of mindedness in canine-human 
relationships." J. Contemp. Ethnogr. 22.2 (1993). 
16. Suchman, L. A. Human-machine reconfigurations: 
Plans and situated actions.  2nd ed. 2007. 
17. Taylor, Alex S. "M
 achine Intelligence." In Proc. CHI 
'09, ACM Press, 2109-2118. 
18. Teh, K. S., Lee, S. P., and Cheok, A. D. "Poultry. 
Internet: a remote human-pet interaction system." In 
Extended abstracts of CHI ’06 , ACM Press, 251-254 . 
19.
 Turkle, Sherry. "Authenticity  in the age of digital 
companions." Interaction Studies 8.3 (2007).
CHI 2011 • Session: Cats, Dogs, Sports, Games & Books
May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada
2664
